http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-12-16/sydney-siegesocial-media-a-liability-says-expert/5971622
Updated December 16 , 2014 23 :19:00
A terrorism expert has warned that social media could interfere with future operations like the one which brought the Martin Place siege in Sydney to an end overnight .
" It 's natural we have that curiosity to figure that out , but somebody sending a tweet saying ' I 've just seen a man in SWOT gear climb a ladder', the gunman could be hearing that in real time and making a response , " Professor Greg Barton told 7.30 .
" We have to be careful .
Maybe in this case it did n't have a consequence but there 'll be other cases in the future . "
At the height of the siege , NSW Deputy Police Commissioner Catherine Burn confirmed that social media was hampering their ability to control information .
" We are monitoring what 's happening on Facebook clearly , " she told reporters .
" We are monitoring what 's happening on Twitter and that is forming a part of our tactical response in how to handle this . "
But it is not just the media and a general public hungry for information that are using social media .
" Increasingly with modern terrorism we 're seeing an increased focus on getting publicity and modern media , particularly social media , " Professor Barton said .
" Islamic State ( IS) , the latest variation of Al Qaeda , is intensely interested in media and publicity and very , very good at getting it .
" And even when they 've inspired some rather pathetic character to do something that 's not particularly professional , what they 've achieved via this guy is getting the whole world to pay attention for a 24-hour cycle . "
The hostage taker , Man Haron Monis , was also using it to try and manipulate an outcome for his own ends , forcing one of the hostages , Marcia Mikhael , to post his demands on her Facebook page .
That post was at 5:29pm ( AEDT) , almost seven hours into the siege , and the posts continued through the evening .
Eventually Ms Mikhael 's niece pleaded for people to stop sharing her posts , warning they could put the hostages ' lives at risk .
" You really ca n't hermetically seal information flows off anymore , " Professor Barton said .
" That reality may well have undermined the good professional response from media .
" We 'll have to sort of do the analysis and try and figure it out ."
Among it all , a message of hope did emerge on Twitter – the hashtag #illridewithyou , Australians tweeting to encourage support and friendship for Muslims travelling on public transport by offering to ride with them .
More than 300,000 people have volunteered .
Topics : social-media , internet-culture , terrorism
First posted December 16 , 2014 22:01:37
