http://curbed.com/archives/2014/12/15/masculine-feminine-design-decor-writing.php
Is this space "feminine " ?
How about "ladylike " ?
Photo via Design Sponge
Others have made the point before , but the ongoing use of the words "masculine " and "feminine " in design writing has us , the staff of Curbed National , feeling it needs to be stated again , as clearly as possible : the people who write about decor and design need to stop describing spaces with gendered terms .
It 's an easy fix .
Decor bloggers , shelter editors , design writers : do n't type the words "masculine " or "manly " or "feminine " or "ladylike " or "girly " when describing spaces .
Do n't use any other words that prescribe gender to furniture or interiors .
Let 's say two spaces were written up in a decor blog , and one was described as masculine , and the other feminine .
Which would have white walls ?
Which would have raw concrete floors ?
Which would remind you more of Pinterest ?
Which would have more heavy leather furniture ?
In which would the books be ordered by color , and what would that say about the person who organized them that way ?
Which would have more antlers and dark throws ?
If these have fairly easy answers , it 's because we 're in the realm of stereotype .
The uncharitable term for a writer who channels stereotypes without some measure of ironic distance is "hack . "
Curbed National writers have used these terms before .
Curbed National writers have stopped .
A room "masculine " enough for a modern lumberjack .
Photo via Urban Cowboy
The use of the words "masculine " and "feminine " to describe spaces harks back to one of the very first lessons children learn in school ; what boys do and what girls do .
This is one of those parts of culture that it 's very good to train yourself out of , or be trained out of , or never learn in the first place .
Many people across the spectrum of gender and sexuality have complicated relationships with what society seems to expect from them .
It would be cool if these people could engage in the leisurely practice of reading about furniture or interiors without having some of the shallowest of those expectations foisted upon them .
It 's important to note that femininity , by and large , is considered an additive .
In interior design , it 's translated to fresh flowers , stemware , and bed skirts .
It is ephemeral where masculinity is formidable .
It is whimsical where masculinity is utilitarian .
It is antiqued where masculinity is modern .
Lace and chintz exist only in "feminine " spaces .
If spareness and raw architecture are "masculine , " then we 're essentially saying that traditionally "feminine " decorating is frivolous .
Suddenly those who associate themselves with femininity become a little less essential and a little less relevant .
And , in the end , maybe just a little less .
Who wants to live in a world where all of that is taken for granted ?
Some might , but why would we trust those people to advise us in matters of style ?
It 's laughable in an era where the most prominent proponent of pink in the world of industrial design is a man , and the most sought-after and vilified hero-architect in the world is a woman .
Gendered design writing is lazily offensive .
But more to the point , it 's offensively lazy .
We can do better .
