PARIS — Europe wants to cash in on its tough data protection rules .
European Union policy makers are demanding greater controls over how companies like Google and Facebook use personal information .
At the same time , others would like to use those same laws to help European companies compete against their American rivals as a way to jump-start a sluggish economy .
That debate over how best to leverage the regulations was on show during a meeting here on Monday , as local privacy regulators gathered to discuss the growing public outcry over how governments and tech giants gather and use people’s data .
That outcry has resulted from disclosures by Edward J. Snowden , the former National Security Agency contractor , about the activities of the American and British intelligence services , as well as the expanding use of people’s information by Internet companies like Microsoft and Amazon .
‘‘ We feel we are losing control over our data , ’’ said Isabelle Falque-Pierrotin , who heads the French data protection authority .
‘‘Data protection is at a crossroads , and it ’s important that Europe speaks with one voice .’’
Europe is now completing a new round of privacy rules , expected to be made final next year , that will give greater power to individuals over who has access to their data and how it is used .
European policy makers are also considering fines of up to 5 percent of a company ’s annual revenue , or $ 125 million , whichever is greater , when the strict privacy rules are breached .
While regulators are pressing ahead with even tougher data protection rules , some of Europe’s lawmakers are eager to allow homegrown companies to use the rules governing the growing amount of personal information online as a defense against the American tech giants that currently dominate the region’s Internet economy .
In Germany , for example , policy makers and tech companies have created made-in-Germany email and cloud services — which allow people to store information on the Internet instead of on their own hard drives — that comply with the country ’s tough data protection rules .
And companies in Finland and France are pushing their own rival services , which are based on Europe’s stricter privacy rules , in the hope of enticing users to switch from American Internet giants to local competitors .
‘‘Europe must turn data protection into a competitive advantage , ’’ Manuel Valls , the French prime minister , said at the meeting here on Monday .
‘‘It’s difficult to accept that European citizens have their data siphoned off by other countries without their knowledge .’’
Critics warn , however , that Europe must also beef up its oversight of all technology companies as they are increasingly scraping individual data for commercial use .
Currently , each of the European Union’s 28 members has a separate data protection authority that oversees the activities of companies in its jurisdiction .
Campaigners say that these domestic regulators have yet to assess hefty fines on Internet companies for the potential abuse of people’s online data , and that the system must be revamped to keep up with how companies , either European or those from outside the union , are using online information .
‘‘The system we have now is n’t working , ’’ said Max Schrems , an Austrian lawyer who has brought a class-action lawsuit against Facebook that accuses the company of misusing personal data .
‘‘If you park in the wrong place , you get a parking ticket .
But if a company violates the privacy rights of millions of people , nothing happens .’’
