Google , like many tech companies , is a man’s world .
Started by a pair of men , its executive team is overwhelmingly male , and its work force is dominated by men .
Over all , seven out of 10 people who work at Google are male .
Men make up 83 percent of Google’s engineering employees and 79 percent of its managers .
In a report to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission last year , Google said that of its 36 executives and top-ranking managers , just three are women .
Google’s leaders say they are unhappy about the firm’s poor gender diversity , and about the severe underrepresentation of blacks and Hispanics among its work force .
And so they are undertaking a long-term effort to improve these numbers , the centerpiece of which is a series of workshops aimed at making Google’s culture more accepting of diversity .
There’s just one problem : The company has no solid evidence that the workshops , or many of its other efforts to improve diversity , are actually working .
In some ways Google’s plan to fix its diversity issues resembles many of its most ambitious product ideas , from self-driving cars to wiring the country for superfast Internet .
As in those efforts , it has set a high goal in this case : to fight deep-set cultural biases and an insidious frat-house attitude that pervades the tech business .
Tech luminaries make sexist comments so often that it has ceased to be news when they do .
Google is attacking the problem with its considerable resources and creativity .
But it does not have a timeline for when the company ’s work force might become representative of the population , or whether it will ever get there .
“ I think it ’s terrific that they’re doing this , ” said Freada Kapor Klein , an entrepreneur who has long studied workplace diversity , and who is the co-chairwoman of the Kapor Center for Social Impact .
“ But it ’s going to be important that Google not just give a lecture about the science , but that there be active strategies on how to mitigate bias .
A one-shot intervention against a lifetime of biased messages is unlikely to be successful . ”
Google says its plan is n’t one-shot .
It points out that it has been trying to improve its diversity for years by sponsoring programs to increase the number of women and minorities who go into tech , and meticulously studying the way it hires people in an effort to reduce bias .
In May after pressure from civil rights leaders , the company published a report documenting the sex and race of its employees “to be candid about the issues , ” Laszlo Bock , Google’s executive in charge of human resources , wrote at the time .
Google’s disclosure prompted a wave of similar reports across the industry , with Facebook , Apple , Yahoo and other tech giants issuing similarly dismal numbers about their work forces .
Google’s diversity training workshops , which began last year and which more than half of Google’s nearly 49,000 employees have attended , are based on an emerging field of research in social psychology known as unconscious bias .
These are the hidden , reflexive preferences that shape most people’s worldviews , and that can profoundly affect how welcoming and open a workplace is to different people and ideas .
Google’s interest in hidden biases was sparked in 2012 , when Mr. Bock read an article in The New York Times about a study that showed systematic discrimination against female applicants for scientific jobs in academia .
The effect was so pervasive that researchers theorized the discrimination must be governed by unconscious cultural biases rather than overt sexism .
Mr. Bock wondered how such unconscious biases were playing out at Google .
“This is a pretty genteel environment , and you don’t usually see outright manifestations of bias , ” he said .
“Occasionally you’ll have some idiot do something stupid and hurtful , and I like to fire those people . ”
But Mr. Bock suspected that the more pernicious bias was most likely pervasive and hidden , a deep-set part of the culture rather than the work of a few loudmouth sexists .
Improving diversity was n’t just a feel-good goal for Google .
Citing research that shows diverse teams can be more creative than homogeneous ones , Mr. Bock argued that a diverse work force could be good for Google’s business .
Could Google investigate how biases were affecting people’s work — and , more important , could it change its own culture ?
Google’s human resources group , which goes by the name People Operations , functions like a graduate school research lab , with staff scientists who are constantly analyzing the company ’s internal operations .
Mr. Bock asked one of these researchers , Brian Welle , to begin a project on hidden biases .
After a few months , Dr. Welle came up with a 90-minute lecture targeted specifically at a skeptical , scientifically minded Google employee .
The lecture begins with a dismal fact : Everyone is a little bit racist or sexist .
If you think you’re immune , take the Implicit Association Test , which empirically measures people’s biases .
Dr. Welle goes on to explain that some of the most damaging bias is unconscious ; people do the worst stuff without meaning to , or even recognizing that they’re being influenced by their preferences .
The effect of bias is powerful , and it is n’t softened by Silicon Valley’s supposedly meritocratic culture .
In the lecture , Dr. Welle shows a computer simulation of how a systematic 1 percent bias against women in performance evaluation scores can trickle up through the ranks , leading to a severe underrepresentation of women in management .
Finally , Dr. Welle points to research showing that we aren’t slaves to our hidden biases .
The more we make ourselves aware of the role our unconscious plays in our decision-making , and the more we try to force others to confront their biases , the greater the chance we have of overcoming our hidden preferences .
Google offered several anecdotes that seem to indicate a less biased culture as a result of the training .
Not long ago the company opened a new building , and someone spotted the fact that all the conference rooms were named after male scientists ; in the past , that might have gone unmentioned , but this time the names were changed .
During one recent promotion meeting in which a group of male managers were deciding the fate of a female engineer , a senior manager who had been through the bias training cautioned his colleagues to remember that they were all men — and thus might not be able to fully appreciate the different roles women perform in engineering groups .
“ Just raising the awareness was enough for people to think about it , ” Mr. Bock said .
The woman was promoted .
Another time , in an all-company presentation , an interviewer asked a male and female manager who had recently begun sharing an office , “ Which one of you does the dishes ? ”
The strange , sexist undertone of the question was immediately seized upon by a senior executive in the crowd , who yelled , “ Unconscious bias ! ”
Mr. Bock saw all of these actions as evidence that the training was working .
“Suddenly you go from being completely oblivious to going , ‘Oh my god , it ’s everywhere , ’ ” he said .
But whether that will lead to a long-term change at Google and , in turn , the rest of the tech industry , remains an open question .
