Once upon a time , a new technology happened along .
It was called radio .
Soon enough , some people began plucking wireless transmissions out of the air for their own purposes .
One clever young man in Washington figured out how to intercept messages that Navy units sent to one another .
“ He has represented himself to be at distant naval stations or at sea on warships equipped with wireless apparatus , ” a magazine called Electrical World reported in 1907 .
Back then , this fellow’s actions were not unlawful .
They amounted nonetheless to a form of piracy .
As radio grew more sophisticated , so did those intent on beating the system .
In 1960s Britain , radio pirates flourished on unlicensed stations that broadcast from ships anchored beyond territorial limits .
They found eager audiences in young people who tuned in for the latest from the Rolling Stones , the Kinks and the Who .
( Talkin’ ′bout my generation . )
Then the world went digital .
Naturally , pirates tagged along .
One of them , the online sharing service Napster , forms the core of this Retro Report offering , the final installment in the current series of video documentaries examining the consequences of major news stories from the past .
Napster did not last long , two years .
But for a while at the dawn of this century it claimed to have 70 million registered users .
It spawned a host of Internet music-swapping providers , more than a few of them falling on the dubious side of the law .
Most important , it irrevocably altered not only the way in which Americans absorbed music but also their belief system in what they should pay .
The conviction theologically held by many boiled down to a single word : nothing .
“You have a generation of people now who expect their music for free , ” Greg Hammer , managing director of Red Bull Records , a branch of the energy-drink company , told Retro Report .
“It’s very difficult to change . ”
The music industry is not alone in coming to terms with altered realities .
As every sentient soul surely knows by now , the “culture of free” — words borrowed from the title of this week’s video — has turned the print world upside down , pushing newspapers , magazines and book publishers into a frantic search for financial safe harbors .
With the advent of broad Internet use in the 1990s came a notion that information should be free .
Never mind that the gathering and transmission of information can be a costly proposition and that ( dirty word alert ) money is needed if the survival of , say , a newspaper is to be ensured .
As with music in Mr. Hammer’s observation , a generation now believes that the written word , whether on processed wood or in pixels , should come without charge .
Napster burst forth in June 1999 , the brainchild of an entrepreneurial , 18-year-old computer wiz , Shawn Fanning .
His creation enabled anyone with a modicum of tech savvy to share audio files in MP3 format — peer to peer , as it was called .
Music lovers could download thousands upon thousands of songs , then pass them on to friends or create albums of their own on compact discs .
No one paid royalties .
To music companies and some individual artists , this was high-tech piracy and a threat to their fiscal well-being .
( It might be noted that the commercial introduction of CDs in the early 1980s delivered its own near-mortal blow to an earlier technology , long-playing vinyl records . )
The Recording Industry Association of America sued Napster for copyright infringement .
So did a few musicians , like the rapper Dr. Dre and the heavy metal band Metallica .
Not every performer thought of Napster as the enemy .
Some who might otherwise have been doomed to oblivion regarded the service as a platform from which they might find listeners and build a fan base .
Nor were all economists convinced that one free download equaled one less sale of a high-priced CD ; quite possibly , some of them said , people were plugging into music that they would never have paid for .
Napster , however , did not have the courts on its side .
Ordered by federal judges to stop allowing copyrighted material to be traded on its system , it shut down in July 2001 .
But from its ashes other file-sharing services arose , some bearing curious names like Grokster , Kazaa and Gnutella .
Mr. Fanning tried his hand at new digital media endeavors , including Snocap and Napster 2.0.
Few of those companies were unqualified successes .
One thing was certain , though : The culture of free was not going away .
A decade ago , Apple established a new order in the commercial music universe by introducing the iTunes store .
From its vast digital warehouse , customers could buy any song they wished , typically for 99 cents .
The arrangement was perhaps not ideal for the recording companies and for many performers .
Among other things , music albums — fixtures since the ’60s and , in many instances , creative masterpieces — were becoming relics ; single-song listening ruled , whether through an iTunes purchase or snatched from the ether via file-swapping networks .
Still , for the industry , some money was better than none , and so an iTunes reality beat a Napster world .
Now the music business is in transition once more , reshaped by streaming services like YouTube , Spotify and Pandora .
Instead of owning songs , a listener can in effect borrow them from millions of titles made available by these operations .
A cultural shift seems well underway , with more and more consumers sensing they no longer need to possess certain physical items , like CDs or books .
A reliable Internet connection will do .
Unlike Napster and the like , the streaming services are not engaged in piracy .
They are legally licensed , having paid music companies some money .
They themselves cash in by selling advertising or , increasingly , by offering subscriptions to customers interested in a commercial-free experience .
The results have been stark .
Data from Nielsen SoundScan , a sales-tracking system , show that consumers in this country listened to 70 billion songs via streaming services in the first half of 2014 , an increase of 42 percent from the same period a year earlier .
Sales of albums , whether on CDs or through digital downloads , declined by 15 percent .
Downloads of individual tracks were down by 13 percent .
Embrace the change , Silicon Valley types say .
But even if one does , it comes at a cost .
As CDs fade from the scene , so do stores like Tower Records .
Thousands of jobs are lost : workers who make the discs , wholesale buyers , salespeople , stockroom clerks , accountants and others .
Substitute work for them is not assured in the digital cosmos .
And , thus far , the people who create the music on which others build their fortunes often receive mere rivulets of reward .
Not everyone is a Beyoncé or a Taylor Swift ( who has removed her entire oeuvre from Spotify to keep it behind a pay wall ) .
Many more musicians are like Zoe Keating , a cellist from Northern California who described her situation in detail last year .
Over a six-month period , Ms. Keating’s songs had been played on Pandora more than 1.5 million times ; that earned her all of $ 1,652.74 .
She had 131,000 plays on Spotify in 2012 .
She took home $ 547.71 , or less than half a penny per play .
Some industry executives insist that , over time , things will sort themselves out , including how to steer more money to performers .
Last month , for instance , YouTube announced plans to generate revenue by giving its users an opportunity to pay a few dollars a month in return for extra features that are not available to those who click on songs at no charge .
Royalties to artists , in theory anyway , would thus rise .
In the meantime , some oldsters ( talkin’ ′bout my generation again ) may derive a measure of comfort from learning that vinyl albums still have life .
Nielsen SoundScan reported four million sales of vinyl LPs in the first half of this year , a 40 percent increase from the same period in 2013 .
Go figure .
Hey , maybe you can get a copy of “Revolution 9” from the Beatles ’ White Album , and check out for yourself if , when played backward on a turntable , it really does tell you that Paul is dead .
