Until last year , when she became a planning consultant for a college in Florida , Alison Barlow traveled almost full time for an information technology company .
She was away as long as three weeks a month , making it home on weekends about half the time .
When a hotel stay at a Hampton Inn in suburban Omaha was punctuated by a bout of flu , the staff made drugstore runs and brought her tea and crackers .
Knowing she would return soon , she would leave a bag behind with toiletries , workout wear and extra clothes .
“You don’t want to check luggage on an airplane , ” she said .
While staying at a Candlewood Suites , she borrowed books and DVDs .
As hotels continue to add all manner of fees and executives look over their shoulders at Airbnb and the sharing economy , they are increasingly telling guests to pack light and borrow items from them .
While loan programs are an accepted feature at luxury and full-service hotels , experts say that those hotels are now expanding their offerings to include bicycles , automobiles and running gear .
And hotels on a lower tier , like Candlewood Suites , are starting their own programs .
“It’s reached all the way down from luxury to full-service hotels , and it ’s not unusual for select service , ” says Bjorn Hanson , professor at the Tisch Center for Hospitality and Tourism at New York University .
Some programs — like Kimpton Hotels ’ Forgot It ? We’ve Got It ! — have been available for a decade .
They are drawing renewed attention because younger travelers are responding to hotels ’ attempts to create a relationship by going out of their way for guests .
Bonnie Knutson , a professor at Michigan State University’s School of Hospitality Business , said she saw an emphasis on choice , personalization and customization .
“Guests are saying , ‘ I only want to pay for what I want to use , ' ” she said .
The Kimpton program offers a variety of small items and appliances , including chargers , hair dryers , extension cords and curling irons .
Hyatt Has It was introduced in February 2013 with similar offerings .
“Before , travelers thought we did n’t offer any product other than a toothbrush , ” says Kristine Rose , vice president for brand experience at Hyatt .
The program is aimed at the female traveler .
“Women tend to travel with a lot more things in their luggage , ” she said .
The program is offered under different names at all Hyatt brands .
In addition to lending books and DVDs , Candlewood Suites , an extended-stay division of the InterContinental Hotels Group , introduced a Lending Locker in 300 hotels in October 2013 .
The floor-to-ceiling enclosure provides items not typically found in guest rooms including fans , crockpots , dehumidifiers and office supplies .
Robert Radomski , vice president for brand management at I.H.G. 's extended-stay brands , which include Candlewood Suites , says the program creates a feeling of belonging for guests .
“It adds to their comfort , ” he said .
Some programs emphasize fitness .
Westin Hotels introduced a Westin-New Balance equipment-lending program at more than 200 hotels in November 2012 .
The company estimates 30,000 guests a year participate .
Peter Shankman , an entrepreneur and author of the coming book “Zombie Loyalists ” was one .
Fourteen months ago , at a Westin in Atlanta , he was up at 5 a.m. for a run before an early meeting .
After donning his shorts , he realized he forgot to pack running socks .
Expecting to run a 10-kilometer race three days later , he thought wearing dress socks for a seven-mile run that morning invited blisters .
The front desk staff offered him a free pair of running socks .
“They allowed me to continue on a schedule I preferred , which meant more to me than anything , ” he said .
Still , he has not traveled without his own equipment since .
A Westin hotel typically charges $ 5 per stay for the socks , freshly laundered workout wear in a variety of sizes for both sexes , and sneakers that are cleaned and disinfected after each use .
The inner soles are changed monthly .
Fitness appeal takes different forms .
In July 2013 , Kimpton , in partnership with Public , a San Francisco boutique bicycle and equipment company , introduced a fleet of Kimpton-branded bicycles that are free for guests to use .
Two to 10 bikes are available at 61 locations .
For guests who prefer four wheels , in March Loews introduced a chauffeur-driven car at five locations nationwide to take guests to nearby destinations .
Guests are responsible for their return transportation to the hotel .
At locations in Miami , Hollywood and Santa Monica , the hotels also offer free Fiat loaner cars .
Even as loan programs can create greater loyalty and perhaps a willingness to pay a premium for a specific hotel , they have potential drawbacks , according to one expert , who sees the possibility that fewer guests will request items in the future , because of concerns about health and well-being .
“Some hotels may temporarily suspend these items as a precautionary response to protecting guest health and reducing liability , ” Henry Harteveldt , an analyst at Atmosphere Research Group , wrote in an email .
For some guests , like Ms. Barlow , a preferred amenity is the ability to leave belongings behind .
Mike DeFrino , the chief operating officer at Kimpton Hotels , said he had noticed at locations in Cambridge , Mass. , and Cupertino , Calif. , as many as 5 percent of guests are leaving bags behind .
“At Cupertino , they leave suits , ” he said .
“They don’t want to travel with blazers . ”
By accepting guest property for safekeeping , hotels run the risk of losing reputation and loyalty if something happens to it .
“The worst thing is to lose or misplace a guest item , ” Mr. Hanson said .
Ms. Barlow said she drew the line at leaving a laptop .
Still , even as her travel has abated , she said she missed staying long enough to establish a rapport with the hotel staff .
