Rising income inequality has set off fierce political and economic debates , but one important angle has n’t been explored adequately .
We need to ask whether market forces themselves might limit or reverse the trend .
Technology has contributed to the rise in inequality , but there are also some significant ways in which technology could reduce it .
For example , while computers have improved our lives in many ways , they have n’t yet done much to make health care and education cheaper .
Over the next few decades , however , that may well change : We can easily imagine medical diagnosis by online artificial intelligence , greater use of online competitive procurement for health care services , more transparency in pricing and thus more competition , and much cheaper online education for many students , to cite just a few possibilities .
In such a world , many wage gains would come from new and cheaper services , rather than from being able to cut a better deal with the boss at work .
It is a bit harder to see how information technology can lower housing costs , but perhaps the sharing economy can make it easier to live in much smaller spaces and rent needed items , rather than store them in a house or apartment .
That would enable lower-income people to live closer to higher-paying urban jobs and at lower cost .
Another set of future gains , especially for lesser-skilled workers , may come as computers become easier to handle for people with rudimentary skill .
Not everyone can work fruitfully with computers now .
There is a generation gap when it comes to manipulating electronic devices , and many relevant tasks require knowledge of programming or , more ambitiously , the entrepreneurial skill of creating a start-up .
That , in a nutshell , is how our dynamic sector has concentrated its gains among a relatively small number of employees , thus leading to more income inequality .
This particular type of inequality may very well change .
As the previous generation retires from the work force , many more people will have grown up with intimate knowledge of computers .
And over time , it may become easier to work with computers just by talking to them .
As computer-human interfaces become simpler and easier to manage , that may raise the relative return to less-skilled labor .
The future may also extend a growing category of employment , namely workers who team up with smart robots that require human assistance .
Perhaps a smart robot will perform some of the current functions of a factory worker , while the human companion will do what the robot cannot , such as deal with a system breakdown or call a supervisor .
Such jobs would require versatility and flexible reasoning , a bit like some of the old manufacturing jobs , but not necessarily a lot of high-powered technical training , again because of the greater ease of the human-computer interface .
That too could raise the returns to many relatively unskilled workers .
A more universal expertise with information technology also might reverse some of the income inequalities that stem from finance .
For instance , the returns from high-frequency trading were higher a few years ago , in part because few firms used it ; now many firms can trade at very high speeds .
It remains to be seen whether similar developments will lower hedge fund returns , but again it is possible to imagine a future in which many of the best investment and trading techniques are very widely copied and thus cease to be especially profitable .
A final set of forces to reverse growing inequality stem from the emerging economies , most of all China .
Perhaps we are living in a temporary intermediate period when America and many other developed nations bear a lot of the costs of Chinese economic development without yet getting many of the potential benefits .
For instance , China and other emerging nations are already rich enough to bid up commodity prices and large enough to drive down the wages of a lot of American middle-class workers , especially in manufacturing .
Yet while these emerging economies are keeping down the costs of manufactured goods for American consumers , they are not yet innovative enough to send us many fantastic new products , the way that the United States sends a stream of new products to British or French consumers , to their benefit .
That state of affairs will probably end .
Over the next few decades , we can expect China , India and other emerging nations to supply more innovations to the global economy , including to the United States .
This should n’t be a cause for alarm .
It will lead to many good things .
Since the emerging economies are relatively poor , many of these innovations may benefit relatively low-income Americans .
India has already pioneered techniques for cheap , high-quality heart surgery and other medical procedures , and over time such techniques may achieve a foothold in the United States .
Imagine a future China producing cheaper and safer cars , a cure for some kinds of cancer , and workable battery storage for solar energy .
Ordinary Americans could be much better off , and without having to work for those gains .
To be clear , these are speculations and should not be taken as reasons to avoid improving our economy right now ; furthermore , other trends may push in less positive directions .
Still , these possibilities reframe the inequality problem .
In the popular model developed by the economist Thomas Piketty , inequality is fundamentally about capital versus labor .
In his view , capital has opened up an ever-widening lead because of the relatively high rates of return on savings and investment .
The natural response to reverse this trend , according to Mr. Piketty , would be a direct attack on the return to capital , such as through a global wealth tax .
In the scenarios outlined here , though , growing inequality is highly contingent on particular technologies and the global conditions of the moment .
Movements toward greater inequality often set countervailing forces in motion , even if those forces take a long time to come to fruition .
From this perspective , rather than seeking to beat down capital , our attention should be directed to leaving open the future possibilities for innovation , change and dynamism .
Even if income inequality continues to increase in the short run , as I believe is likely , there exists a plausible and more distant future in which we are mostly much better off and more equal .
The history of technology suggests that new opportunities for better living and higher wages are being created , just not as quickly as we might like .
