Updated , 9:10 p.m. | OAKLAND , Calif .
— The lawyers fighting Apple in a class-action lawsuit involving iPods have managed to do a few remarkable things : They persuaded a judge to bring a decade-old lawsuit to trial here last week , for one .
They even managed to drag the famous Steve Jobs into giving a videotaped testimony shortly before he died three years ago .
But they have one big problem : Their case has no plaintiff .
A federal judge on Monday disqualified the only remaining plaintiff in the case , Marianna Rosen of New Jersey , after Apple’s lawyers successfully argued that she did not even buy any iPods for which she is seeking damages .
That argument also gave Apple an opening last week to ask Yvonne Gonzalez Rogers , the federal judge overseeing the case , to throw out the suit .
The judge , however , disagreed with Apple’s argument that it was too late to add a new plaintiff .
She ordered the plaintiff lawyers to find one by Tuesday morning .
The judge appeared annoyed about the discrepancies with Ms. Rosen’s iPods and scolded the plaintiff lawyers for failing to do their homework .
Another plaintiff in the case dropped out last week .
“You’ve certainly created a problem on the plaintiffs ’ side , ” Judge Gonzalez Rogers said before reaching her decision .
The lawsuit , filed a decade ago , involves older iPods , which played only songs sold in the iTunes Store , or those downloaded from CDs — not music from competing stores .
The plaintiff lawyers represent consumers who say Apple violated antitrust law because to keep their music , people had to stay with the iPod and buy higher-priced ones rather than cheaper , alternative music players .
For this , the plaintiff lawyers want Apple to pay consumers at least $ 350 million in damages .
The lawyers suing Apple were busy over the weekend , filing papers about Ms. Rosen’s standing as a witness .
Last week , Ms. Rosen testified that she had bought two iPods : an iPod Nano in the fall of 2007 and an iPod Touch in December 2008 .
Apple’s lawyer asked whether Ms. Rosen kept receipts for her purchases .
Ms. Rosen said she probably did not have the paper receipts , but later said her iPod Touch was in her bag .
Apple’s lawyers looked up the serial number of Ms. Rosen’s iPod Touch and found records showing it was bought in July 2009 .
The class action seeks damages for iPods bought from September 2006 to March 2009 .
So this iPod Touch missed the cutoff .
Apple’s lawyers last Wednesday pointed out the discrepancy about Ms. Rosen’s iPod Touch in a letter to the judge .
They also raised similar concerns about the second plaintiff’s iPod purchases .
On Friday , the second plaintiff dropped out of the case , leaving Ms. Rosen as the lone plaintiff .
Ms. Rosen’s lawyers then provided Apple a receipt showing two iPod purchases made in September 2008 .
But Apple pulled up its copy of the receipt for those iPods , which indicated they were bought by the Rosen Law Firm , the firm owned by Ms. Rosen’s husband .
Apple’s lawyers argued that these were not iPods bought directly by Ms. Rosen , and therefore she could not claim injury .
Over the weekend , Ms. Rosen’s lawyers filed a letter including a declaration by Ms. Rosen about the iPods .
In it , Ms. Rosen said that on Sept. 11 , 2008 , she bought an iPod Touch — not the same one that she brought to court .
She also said that on the same day , she bought the iPod Nano .
In her declaration , Ms. Rosen also said that she bought the iPods for her own use , not for her husband’s law firm .
But she said that she believed the credit card she used was issued in both her name and that of the family business , the Rosen Law Firm , and that she was authorized to make personal purchases with it .
In summary , Ms. Rosen amended her testimony , saying that she bought two iPods on the same day in September 2008 .
Despite that , the judge said late Monday that Ms. Rosen was inadequate to serve as a plaintiff .
Bonny Sweeney , the plaintiff’s lead attorney , told the judge that a number of people had approached her team over the weekend , asking to be considered as plaintiffs , and many had already been interviewed .
“Yes , we certainly have another plaintiff , ” she said .
