AN old Viennese saying to the effect that " the situation is hopeless but not serious " seems to sum up what several Madison Avenue thought leaders believe lies in store for the industry next year .
The senior executives , in presentations on Monday at an annual media conference , predicted that the rough times the advertising business has endured for the last several years would continue into 2015 .
Still , there will be steady growth in worldwide advertising spending of 4.8 to 5 percent compared with this year , according to their forecasts , as a result of factors that include gains in digital ad sales and improving economic conditions in markets like India and the United States .
The better outcome the executives anticipate for 2015 compared with 2014 may not warrant dancing a Viennese waltz , but would be respectable , they suggested , in light of the many issues that worry them and marketer clients .
" If anybody in this room thinks life is easy , " said Martin Sorrell , chief executive of WPP , the world 's largest agency holding group in revenue , " think again . "
He cited a news story late last week in London , where WPP is based , reporting that a giant marketer , Premier Foods , "was asking its suppliers , including advertising agencies , to pay a sort of toll or fee to earn the right " to continue doing business with the company in what is called a pay-and-stay arrangement .
Although Premier executives subsequently "withdrew " those requests , Mr. Sorrell said , it underscored " the tough economic position " of advertisers and how " the pressure to reduce costs " is now a constant .
" The biggest challenge we face as an industry is convincing clients to focus on the top line rather than reducing costs , " he added , and to realize that ad spending is " an investment , not a cost . "
As for agencies , Mr. Sorrell said , " the pressure is intensifying " in areas like payment terms , where clients want more leeway .
Yet in a tough , troubled climate , it will be " the same again " for ad spending next year as it was this year , he added : trudging ahead from the previous year despite "gray swans " -- Mr. Sorrell 's term for " known unknowns " that plays off "black swans , " or unforeseen crises .
Mr. Sorrell spoke during the first day of the 42nd annual UBS Global Media and Communications Conference , which continues in Midtown Manhattan through Wednesday .
His wide-ranging remarks -- which included predictions that no party may be able to form a government after the British election next year and that Hillary Rodham Clinton would be elected president in 2016 -- followed the morning keynote , a panel of three media agency leaders offering ad forecasts .
Conditions in the ad and media industry are "unrelentingly tough , " Steve King , chief executive of the ZenithOptimedia division of the Publicis Groupe said in an interview , "because everyone 's trying to squeeze you " and " the pain for not getting it right is greater " than it used to be .
Despite its being " a hard slog , " he added , the business "is in reasonably good shape " because of growth in digital ad spending , "almost entirely coming from newspapers and magazines " ; robust gains in mobile ad spending ; and improvements in " steady-growth " markets like Australia and the United States as well as "fast-growth " markets like China , India and Latin America .
A second panelist , Vincent Letang , executive vice president and director for global forecasting at the Magna Global unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies , said he expected the outcome for 2015 to be " not fantastic , but a decent performance . "
After that , he added , worldwide ad growth " will fluctuate between 5 and 6 percent a year . "
A third panelist , Adam Smith , futures director of GroupM , owned by WPP , wondered how much ad spending may pick up if oil prices , which have sharply declined recently , remain low or head lower .
That would be "quite a strong positive , " he said , because marketers could run more ads to woo consumers who have more to spend as they spend less for gasoline .
Mr. Smith 's forecast for 4.9 percent worldwide ad spending growth in 2015 compared with this year is predicated , he said , on continued gains for digital ads as some ad markets that previously grew rapidly slow down or , in the case of Russia , turn negative .
As for television ad spending , Mr. Smith cast doubt on some predictions that it would decline significantly soon or that digital ad spending would increase at the expense of television .
" Print is the organ donor for digital , " he said , adding : " Print was low-hanging fruit for the Internet .
TV dollars are much further up in the canopy . "
Another speaker , David F. Poltrack , chief research officer of a television giant , the CBS Corporation , acknowledged difficulties for the medium like "resistance in the upfront market " from advertisers that balked at buying commercial time before the start of the 2014-15 season and " a mercurial scatter market " -- buying commercial time during the season -- " that fluctuates from day to day . "
Viewers are certainly watching more streaming video , Mr. Poltrack said , but decisions to shift ad dollars there from television may be premature until more reliable measurement of viewing habits is available .
Digital media is not necessarily antithetical to television , he added , noting that "one million people are watching ' The Big Bang Theory ' on cbs.com " rather than on the CBS broadcast network .
Mr. Smith of GroupM said much the same thing , telling the audience , " If we are going to be predicting doom for TV , let 's look at the numbers first . "
