Updated , 8:47 p.m. | Deal making in the health care industry has been booming all year , with medical technology companies and cosmetic drug makers changing hands at rich premiums .
Now a different part of the industry — antibiotics — is at the center of the mergers and acquisitions frenzy .
Merck & Company said on Monday that it had agreed to acquire Cubist Pharmaceuticals for $ 8.4 billion , plus the assumption of $ 1.1 billion in debt .
The deal will give Merck , the second-largest American drug maker after Pfizer , control of the largest antibiotics company , and deepen its ties with hospitals .
The deal fits into Merck’s strategy of buying midsize drug makers that complement its existing products .
Merck will pay $ 102 a share in cash for Cubist , a 35 percent premium above Cubist’s average share price for the five most recent trading days .
Cubist , based in Lexington , Mass. , makes drugs to treat dangerous bacteria and superbugs , including diseases that can cause pandemics .
Its biggest seller , Cubicin , fits nicely into Merck’s hospital division , one of four areas that executives recently identified as priorities for the company .
Sales in Merck’s hospital acute care division were 10 percent higher in the first three quarters of this year than in the same period last year .
Drug makers are showing renewed interest in antibiotics now that the Food and Drug Administration is offering incentives to manufacturers to invest in new products .
Until recently , drug makers had shied away from developing new antibiotics because there was little financial motivation to do so .
“Large pharma had evacuated the space about a decade ago , ” said Liisa Bayko , an analyst at JMP Securities .
“There were a number of regulatory hurdles with the F.D.A. that were getting very onerous . ”
But now , companies that develop antibiotics can qualify for speedier approvals and can sell their products exclusively for longer periods as part of an effort to combat the growing problem of antibiotic-resistant diseases .
And last year , the federal government announced an agreement to pay GlaxoSmithKline $ 40 million to help it develop drugs that could fight antibiotic resistance and biological agents that terrorists might use .
Merck said the deal with Cubist was about expanding revenue , rather than looking for cost savings .
“The rationale for this deal is revenue growth , ” Kenneth C. Frazier , Merck’s chief executive , said in a telephone interview on Monday .
“Our ability to take these products and take them , for example , globally where we have strength around the world is a great opportunity to grow . ”
Cubist has promising drugs in the pipeline , including those it obtained through two corporate acquisitions of its own .
Cubist bought Optimer and Trius last year , paying about $ 800 million for each .
For Merck , buying Cubist allowed it to instantly bolster its presence in antibiotics .
Cubist is alone among companies of its size in having a robust portfolio of antibiotics .
“This is the only company that has multiple antibiotics , ” Ms. Bayko said .
“If you wanted to get in in a big way , this is the only way to do it . ”
By selling to Merck , Cubist will be able to expand internationally at a faster clip .
Cubist antibiotics are sold only in the United States and Canada , though the company was working on expanding to Western Europe .
“With Merck taking over we have access to this Class A infrastructure around the world , ” said Michael Bonney , Cubist’s chief executive .
Merck also said it saw opportunity in expanding sales of Cubist’s products around the world .
International sales of Cubist’s products made up just 6 percent of the company ’s revenues in the first nine months of this year .
Mr. Frazier said that Merck would continue to buy smaller companies such as Cubist , rather than focus on a megamerger like the $ 66 billion takeover of the Botox maker Allergan by Actavis .
“We’re an innovation-focused company , ” he said .
“We will use business development and M&A to get access to the best science that we can .
We’re not as interested in doing a large consolidation merger that is driven by cost synergies .
A large consolidation transaction to us would be a distraction . ”
Merck approached Cubist about a deal earlier this year , Mr. Bonney said in an interview .
“As we worked with them , the board decided to do a very thorough market check , ” Mr. Bonney said .
“We did have multiple interested parties , but Merck offered the best price and was the best fit . ”
The $ 8.4 billion price has been approved unanimously by the boards of both companies and includes the assumption of about $ 1.1 billion in debt , bringing the enterprise value of the deal to $ 9.5 billion .
Merck , through a subsidiary , will begin a tender offer to investors to acquire all of Cubist’s outstanding shares .
Shares of Cubist jumped 35 percent on Monday , to about $ 100.60 .
Merck shares closed 0.6 percent higher , at $ 61.88 .
“We’re certainly satisfied with the price we got for shareholders , ” Mr. Bonney said .
The deal , which is subject to approval by regulators , is expected to close in the first quarter .
DealBook reported that a deal was in the works after the market closed on Friday .
Last month , Cubist posted third-quarter sales of $ 309 million , a 16 percent increase from the period a year earlier .
Merck makes vaccines , prescription products and oncology treatments .
It posted revenue of about $ 10.6 billion in the third quarter .
It said Cubist would add more than $ 1 billion to its expected 2015 revenues .
The deal is the latest bolt-on acquisition for Merck , which has been looking to bolster its portfolio of drugs even as it faces increased competition from generic drug producers .
It agreed in June , for example , to a $ 3.85 billion deal for Idenix Pharmaceuticals , a maker of treatments for hepatitis C.
But Merck has also shed noncore businesses .
Earlier this year , it sold its consumer business to Bayer for $ 14.2 billion .
JPMorgan Chase , Deutsche Bank and the law firms Hughes Hubbard & Reed and Baker & McKenzie advised Merck , while Morgan Stanley , Goldman Sachs and the law firm Ropes & Gray advised Cubist .
Katie Thomas and Chad Bray contributed reporting .
