SEOUL , South Korea — North Korea on Sunday denied responsibility for hacking the computers of Sony Pictures Entertainment but appeared to relish the attack that crippled the computer systems of the Hollywood company , which is set to release a comedy that involves a plot to assassinate its leader , Kim Jong-un .
Sony Pictures is producing “a film abetting a terrorist act while hurting the dignity of the supreme leadership , ” a spokesman of the National Defense Commission , Mr. Kim’s top governing agency in Pyongyang , was quoted as saying by the North’s Korean Central News Agency .
The spokesman said North Korea did not know why Sony was targeted , but he speculated that the attack “might be a righteous deed of the supporters and sympathizers with ” North Korea in its struggle to “put an end to U.S. imperialism . ”
A hacking attack last month shut down the computer systems of Sony Pictures and exposed a trove of internal data , including salary figures .
North Korea has since emerged as a possible suspect because it has been criticizing Sony Pictures for producing “The Interview , ” a comedy starring Seth Rogen and James Franco that involves the assassination plot against Mr. Kim .
North Korea saw no humor there .
It has called the movie “an act of war ” sponsored by Washington ’s “hostile policy . ”
Mr. Kim’s family has been ruling North Korea since the late 1940s with a totalitarian grip that has rested upon a personality cult .
The government in Pyongyang lashes out at any attempt from the outside to criticize Mr. Kim , calling it a challenge to the “supreme dignity ” of the entire country .
It has been especially sensitive about such criticism in recent weeks because there was an American-supported attempt at the United Nations to ask the Security Council to refer Mr. Kim to an international criminal court for human rights abuses .
No direct evidence has emerged yet that links North Korea to the hacking attack at Sony Pictures , and digital-security analysts have been divided over the likelihood of its involvement .
On Sunday , North Korea said there were “a great number of supporters and sympathizers ” with North Korea “all over the world , ” including “champions of peace ” who might initiate more “righteous reaction ” against the United States’ “evildoings . ”
South Korean and American officials have been increasingly concerned about North Korea’s capability to carry out attacks on computers , especially after huge disruptions of bank , government , media and military websites in South Korea in recent years that South Korea attributed to attacks sponsored by the North .
North Korea has denied involvement and instead blamed South Korea for disrupting its websites in recent years .
North Korea itself is cut off from the Internet , except for a handful of state-approved websites linked to the World Wide Web.
But South Korean officials and defectors from North Korea said North Korea has been training specialists in computer attacks for decades to collect technological data through the Internet , spread the country ’s propaganda online and initiate hacking attacks .
In a report to Congress last year , the United States Defense Department said that given its bleak economic outlook , North Korea might see hacking attacks as “a cost-effective way to develop asymmetric , deniable military options . ”
In October , South Korea’s National Intelligence Service told lawmakers that North Korean-sponsored hackers had spread game apps containing malicious viruses from May through September , affecting an estimated 20,000 South Korean smartphone users .
It did not reveal how it determined that such attacks were sponsored by North Korea .
