One summer day two years ago , Ivan Vesic , a software engineer who lives in the southern Serbian city of Nis , rushed to a local veterinary clinic .
A car had hit his rescue cat , Damian , badly damaging his leg and tail .
The vet , Mirza Sejdinovic , had to amputate the cat’s tail but managed to save his leg .
Mr. Vesic sighed with relief ; Damian was going to be fine .
The two men began to chat and Mr. Sejdinovic complained about the software at his clinic .
Mr. Vesic looked at the computer screen and quickly concluded there must be a better way to manage a veterinary practice .
In the following weeks Mr. Vesic and Mr. Sejdinovic realized they could do something much more ambitious — create user-friendly software to be used by vet practices all over the world .
“We decided that we should actually quit our jobs and start building a start-up , ” Mr. Vesic said , adding that the team was joined by a third partner , Milan Djordjevic , a programmer .
Their company , VetCloud , was born .
More than two years later , after extensive testing in the Balkans and Britain , its practice management software was introduced in London in November .
Mr. Vesic , 28 , Mr. Sejdinovic , 30 , and Mr. Djordjevic , 36 , are among hundreds of entrepreneurs in the Balkans who have launched tech start-ups that they hope to take global , at the same time transforming this ex-communist , relatively poor corner of Europe — known best abroad as war-torn , corrupt and unstable — into a hub for technology and innovation .
“ I believe it ’s only a matter of time before we have a Skype-level success from the region , ” said Lyuben Belov , managing partner at Launchub , a seed fund based in the Bulgarian capital , Sofia , which invests in digital start-ups in southeast Europe .
“Someone will make it big on the global market , ” he added , predicting that a Balkan company would be traded on the Nasdaq in New York one day .
Some Balkan start-ups , like Emailio , a company co-founded by a Bulgarian high school student working on a mobile app to de-clutter inboxes , have moved to Silicon Valley .
Flipps , an app that lets users stream video from mobile devices to a television , has also swapped Bulgaria for the Bay Area .
In another fillip for the region’s start-ups , Facebook announced in July that it was buying LiveRail , a video ad company co-founded by two Romanians , for a reported $ 400 million to $ 500 million .
In October , Progress Software , based in Bedford , Mass. , said it planned to acquire Telerik , a Bulgarian software company , for $ 262.5 million .
For years , big international companies have outsourced information technology work to Eastern Europe .
They have been attracted by relatively cheap labor , low rent and a pool of qualified software developers , whose skills reflect a tradition of strong math and engineering education that goes back to communist times .
Low business taxes help — Bulgaria , for example , offers a flat rate of 10 percent .
Now , those very same reasons are encouraging Balkan entrepreneurs to start their own businesses .
But the Balkans are up against tough competition from Europe’s top start-up destinations , like London , Berlin , Helsinki and Stockholm , where access to venture capital is easier and the start-up scene is much more advanced .
While Balkan entrepreneurs are blessed with ambition , tech know-how and enthusiasm , these would-be billionaires also face red tape , a dearth of government incentives and their own lack of business experience .
Balkan governments are slowly getting more involved in the sector .
Serbia has an Innovation Fund financed by the European Union , which has awarded 53 grants , amounting to €6 million so far .
Sofia is building a €50 million technology park — also with funding from Brussels — to link local businesses and universities and foster innovation .
President Rosen Plevneliev of Bulgaria declared at a groundbreaking ceremony in July that it would be “the heart of start-up culture ” in the country .
Back in Nis , VetCloud’s team has been developing a cloud-based software for vets , which stores medical records , handles appointments and sends alerts when new supplies of medicine are needed .
To win investment for their company , they did not go to Belgrade , the Serbian capital , but to Sofia , where more tech money resides .
“ While there was a community in Belgrade , there was already an ecosystem in Sofia , ” said Mr. Vesic , the company ’s chief executive .
The firm has received €200,000 from Eleven , an accelerator fund that offers a training and mentorship program in return for a stake in the companies it supports .
The VetCloud team spent three months in Bulgaria , learning the nuts and bolts of starting and running a tech company .
“We got the money and advice we needed , ” Mr. Vesic said .
Launchub and Eleven manage a total of €21 million as part of a European Union-sponsored initiative to support small and midsize businesses , named Jeremie .
They have distributed €9 million among 120 start-ups from the region in the past two years and plan to fund around 200 firms by 2015 .
In comparison , German and international venture capitalists in Berlin invested €133 million in start-ups in 2012 , according to a McKinsey study from last year .
But a small amount of funding goes a long way in the Balkans , where costs for starting a business are much lower than those in Berlin or London .
Entrepreneurs have had to overcome the long tradition of outsourcing in the Balkans to want to work for themselves and come up with the next must-have app or big e-business success .
Milos Milic , a 25-year-old Serbian IT developer , is part of the new generation .
Last December , he and his business partner , Srdjan Stupar , quit their jobs to start Farmia , an online exchange for livestock .
Mr. Milic described the change as the best thing that has ever happened to him .
“We have smaller salaries now , but we have a chance to build our own company , ” he said .
Until recently , Serbian start-ups had to look abroad for financing .
But funds like StartLabs , launched last year , aim to fill this gap , offering funding of up to $ 50,000 and connecting firms with mentors and foreign investors .
“This is the best time to start something like this , ” said Nebojsa Lazic , the StartLabs ’ general partner .
Things have changed , he added , since the days when entrepreneurs were half-jokingly called “superheroes with suicidal tendencies” .
Unlike Silicon Valley companies , which have access to hundreds of millions of consumers in the United States alone , Balkan firms are based in a region fragmented into small markets .
But Dilyan Dimitrov , one of Eleven’s founders , says this can be a plus as it forces regional start-ups to develop ideas with broader appeal .
“Everyone who is starting a tech product is very much aware that they have to make a global-scalable product , ” he said .
Playground Energy , based in Sofia , is trying to do exactly that .
The company makes playground equipment that generates electricity from children’s play .
The electricity powers lights , sounds and other effects to encourage the children to play longer .
The company ’s co-founder , Hristo Alexiev , says that being based in Bulgaria gives the company significant advantages .
It can pursue a strategy of global growth while using local designers and developers .
That keeps costs low , making the most of the €200,000 it has secured in investment .
“If we moved to America , we’d have spent half of the money just on the move , rent , lawyers , ” said Mr. Alexiev , who , at 44 , talks about Playground Energy , his sixth start-up , with the enthusiasm of a 17-year-old launching his first business .
But others have chosen a different path , moving to London or Berlin , where they believe they can grow faster .
Unioncy , an online platform designed to let people keep track of their purchases and store their warranties , bills , insurance and manuals all in one place , moved from Sofia to London , where they found more investment opportunities .
But Unioncy’s fate shows that moving to a big tech hub is no guarantee of success .
The business quickly went from start-up to shutdown , announcing its demise at the end of October due to “larger than anticipated technical challenges . ”
VetCloud , the Serbian start-up , also established a presence in London after receiving financing and mentoring from the British office of TechStars , an international fund .
“We decided to move where our market is , ” said Mr. Vesic .
While start-ups in the Balkans hope for a big breakthrough , one nearby ex-communist country has already scored a string of international successes .
Hungary was the launch pad for companies including Prezi , the popular cloud-based presentation software ; Ustream , a live video-streaming platform ; and LogMeIn , which gives users remote access to their computers .
Prezi was created in 2009 as an alternative to Microsoft’s ubiquitous PowerPoint .
Five years later , it has 45 million users around the world .
For a co-founder , Peter Halacsy , the key to start-up success is “not the money , it ’s not the infrastructure , not the legal system ” but changing the way people think — getting away from a stuffy , risk-averse , communist-era mentality .
Along with Ustream and LogMeIn , Prezi created a nongovernmental organization called Bridge Budapest that aims to help and inspire a new generation of Hungarian entrepreneurs .
“ Here , parents tell their kids : ‘Don’t try , it ’s risky .
Go work in a bank , that would be better for you , " ’ said Veronika Pistyur , the organization’s chief executive .
“Now I can see that more and more people are willing to try . ”
But , so far , newer Hungarian start-ups have not managed to reach the same level of success as Prezi and the other established stars of Budapest’s tech scene .
Back in the Balkans , investors are under no illusions that the region will become another Silicon Valley , but some say it could still play a worthwhile role in the international tech scene .
“ What can develop here is a kind of incubator for talents — places that yield people with interesting ideas , ” said Maxim Gurvits , a partner at Sofia-based Teres Capital , which plans to start a venture capital fund to invest in startups in Central and Eastern Europe .
“So , the next time you want to create a company , you go to Sofia , not New York , because it ’s very expensive there . ”
While the Balkans may have plenty of coders , investors say the shortage of people with business experience is a serious disadvantage .
For Mr. Belov , from Launchub , “the only way to have a big success is to have the developers here but the sales and marketing outsourced to places where those skills are developed to perfection , like London and Silicon Valley . ”
Some tech entrepreneurs also want more immediate and practical help .
Some point to the example of the British government , which offers big tax breaks to investors in start-ups and the companies themselves .
“All start-ups need tax benefits and a more relaxed tax system during the first year or two , ” said Danica Radisic , a Belgrade-based entrepreneur .
Despite current obstacles , the coders keep working on their big ideas .
In addition to its launch in Britain , VetCloud has been negotiating partnerships with distributors in the United States .
Mr. Vesic dreams big .
“If you use Dropbox to sync your files , if you use Google to search the Internet , you’ll use VetCloud to manage vets ’ medical records , ” he said .
This article was produced as part of the Balkan Fellowship for Journalistic Excellence , supported by the ERSTE Foundation and Open Society Foundations , in cooperation with the Balkan Investigative Reporting Network .
