WASHINGTON — When President Obama laid out his vision for strict regulation of Internet access last month , he was voicing views thought to be held by many at the most liberal end of the Democratic Party .
A few days later , however , the N.A.A.C.P. , the National Urban League and the Rainbow/PUSH Coalition sent representatives , including the Rev. Jesse L. Jackson , to tell Tom Wheeler , chairman of the Federal Communications Commission , that they thought Mr. Obama’s call to regulate broadband Internet service as a utility would harm minority communities by stifling investment in underserved areas and entrenching already dominant Internet companies .
Their displeasure should not be read as a sign that most civil rights organizations were unhappy with Mr. Obama’s plan , however .
When it comes to the details of Internet regulation , groups that otherwise have much common ground simply don’t see eye to eye .
ColorofChange .org , a black political coalition , and the National Hispanic Media Coalition , for example , support treating Internet access as an essential service like electricity or water — as Mr. Obama proposed — while the League of United Latin American Citizens opposes it .
“The civil rights community is like every sector anywhere .
While from the outside it seems like a monolith , it is not , ” said Cheryl A. Leanza , a policy adviser for the United Church of Christ Office of Communication .
Though she was part of the 11-member group that included Mr. Jackson , she asked the chairman to embrace the president ’s plan .
The debate is but one slice of a huge campaign to lobby the five F.C.C. commissioners as they weigh net neutrality , the concept that all Internet traffic should be treated equally , and whether to reclassify broadband as a more heavily regulated service .
Since 2002 , broadband has been classified as a Title I information service under the Telecommunications Act of 1996 , meaning that the F.C.C. lightly regulates it .
Title II services include “common carriers ” like telephone companies , whose rates the F.C.C. can regulate and whose business plans often require the commission’s approval .
In May , Mr. Wheeler made a proposal that would allow companies to pay Internet providers to give them a “fast lane ” to consumers .
Mr. Wheeler is against that practice , known as paid prioritization , and he said his proposal would discourage it .
But the regulatory outline released by the F.C.C. would still allow for paid prioritization in some circumstances , a loophole that was seized on by opponents .
President Obama urged the F.C.C. to reclassify broadband as a Title II service , which would generally give the commission the authority to prohibit broadband providers from blocking or discriminating against legal online content .
In the four weeks since Mr. Obama’s move , over 100 companies , industry groups and coalitions have met with commissioners and their staffs .
At least 67 of those groups have met with Mr. Wheeler himself — nearly four a day , on average .
Included in those meetings have been civil rights groups with surprisingly divergent views .
The unusual alignments can also be seen in urban governments .
The cities of Baltimore , Chicago , Los Angeles and San Francisco sent representatives to meet with Mr. Wheeler’s advisers to say they agreed with tight regulation , but that view is opposed by the National Organization of Blacks in Government .
“ I think we’re all on board with the values embedded in what President Obama said , things like accelerating broadband deployment and adoption , ” said Nicol Turner-Lee , vice president of the Minority Media and Telecommunications Council and a member of the group including Mr. Jackson that met with the F.C.C. chairman .
“The question is , will we be able to solve these issues by going so far with stringent regulation ? ”
Some of the groups that oppose Title II designation , like the Urban League and the League of United Latin American Citizens , have received contributions from organizations affiliated with Internet service providers , like the Comcast Foundation , the charitable organization endowed by Comcast .
Parts of the Rainbow/PUSH Coalition’s annual symposium on civil rights were conducted last week at Comcast’s offices in Washington .
But those organizations say that the donations or sponsorships do not influence their positions .
“We get support from people on all sides of the issue , including Google and Facebook , ” said Brent A. Wilkes , national executive director of the League of United Latin American Citizens .
“We don’t let any of them influence our position . ”
Several of those favoring Title II , meanwhile , have received funding from organizations affiliated with companies that support stronger regulation .
The National Hispanic Media Coalition conducts events that are sponsored in part by companies like Google and Facebook .
A trade organization sponsored by those and other Internet companies , the Internet Association , supports a shift to stricter regulation .
Jessica Gonzalez , executive vice president of the National Hispanic Media Coalition , said her organization also received support from Comcast for some of its programs .
“There is a clear separation between our policy work and who funds us , ” she said .
One of the primary disagreements among the civil rights groups is over a practice known as “zero rating , ” in which an Internet service provider makes a deal with a content provider like Facebook or Spotify to allow consumers unlimited access to that service without its counting against a cap on data usage .
Because zero-rating plans are most common among mobile broadband providers , those plans could particularly affect minority communities , Ms. Turner-Lee said , which are more likely to depend on mobile systems for Internet access .
It is not entirely clear how Mr. Obama’s plan would affect zero-rated apps .
“The relevant question is whether there is something to be said about zero-rating plans and the ways that they can be used to further Internet adoption , ” Ms. Turner-Lee said , adding that her group had not yet taken a stance .
But critics say that zero-rating programs are just a form of paid prioritization that could further entrench companies like Facebook that have the financial muscle to pay for the privilege .
According to the Mobile Trends Charging Report by Allot Communications , nearly half of mobile broadband providers worldwide offer at least one zero-rated app , and two-thirds of those offer Facebook as one .
The alignment of civil rights groups both for and against Mr. Obama’s recommendation for net-neutrality enforcement is not the only oddity in this debate .
In 2005 , the Supreme Court ruled that the F.C.C. acted within the law when it classified cable broadband as a lightly regulated information service .
Writing a stinging dissent to that decision — that is , saying that broadband was obviously more like a utility — was an otherwise frequent nemesis of Democrats : Justice Antonin Scalia .
