He keeps grade cards for every member of Congress , deploys three million activists to blast lawmakers with anti-immigration telephone calls , faxes and emails , and runs a website where his followers have called undocumented immigrants “criminal invaders ” and “wolves at the door . ”
But for Roy H. Beck , perhaps the most powerful member of the small but vocal movement that has helped scuttle every effort at an immigration overhaul for nearly two decades , the fight is only beginning .
Over the next year , his goal is to cut off funding for President Obama’s executive actions that have shielded up to five million people from deportation and will allow many of them work permits .
“There’s a good chance that we’ll roll back a good share of this , ” Mr. Beck , 66 , said in a recent interview in his Rosslyn , Va. , office , a mostly threadbare space with sweeping views of the Potomac River and the Capitol dome .
“We did as much as possible to make immigration radioactive in as many places as possible . ”
As the founder and president of NumbersUSA , Mr. Beck has 35 staff members and an annual budget of about $ 10 million compared with a coalition of immigrant groups that spent $ 1.5 billion from 2008 to 2012 lobbying for an array of immigration changes , according to an estimate by the nonpartisan Sunlight Foundation .
But what Mr. Beck lacks in resources , he makes up for in impact .
Mr. Beck and his group “have succeeded in thwarting the passage of comprehensive immigration reform by generating popular anger on the right that overwhelmed mainstream Republicans , ” said Frank Sharry of America’s Voice , an advocacy group pressing for such an overhaul .
At the very least , immigration advocates say , they will have to fight the grass-roots uproar that Mr. Beck has fueled .
Mr. Beck , a former environmental journalist who once worked at The Grand Rapids Press and The Cincinnati Enquirer , said he did not feel the rage toward immigrants that he is able to marshal in others .
He said that he voted for Mr. Obama in 2008 , and he is consistently described by his critics as genial and nonconfrontational .
But he says that the rise in immigration levels is destroying the United States — both the environment and employment opportunities for the working class — and is angry at what he considers complicity by the government on the immigrants ’ behalf .
While the country once admitted about 250,000 legal immigrants annually , he said , the number has ballooned to one million , which does not include those who come illegally .
Mr. Beck is pressing to cut legal immigration to 500,000 people a year .
“This has nothing to do with the immigrants themselves , ” Mr. Beck said .
“ But are the people who are here illegally more important than the Americans , the people of this national community , who have absolutely been robbed of their dignity ? ”
Despite his disclaimers , Mr. Beck’s critics say he is pushing a xenophobic agenda and is the benign face of a racist movement .
“ He’s played footsie with extremists all along , ” said Heidi Beirich , the director of the Southern Poverty Law Center ’s Intelligence Project , which tracks hate groups .
Even as she described Mr. Beck as a “completely nice guy , ” Ms. Beirich said that “in a way , what Beck does is , he provides cover for the bad guys . ”
The criticism stems from Mr. Beck’s connection to John H. Tanton , a Michigan ophthalmologist who helped start and finance NumbersUSA and has nurtured two other groups , the Federation for American Immigration Reform and the Center for Immigration Studies , which share Mr. Beck’s commitment to reducing immigration .
Mr. Beck described him as “one of the grand environmental leaders , ” but Mr. Tanton has also been accused of pushing a white nationalist agenda , and he once wrote of his fear of a “Latino onslaught . ”
Mr. Beck said that his group had been independent of Mr. Tanton for a dozen years , and he went out of his way to deny charges of racism .
He has a “No to Immigrant Bashing ” section on the NumbersUSA website urging civil discourse , and said he filtered out user comments that contain overtly racist terms .
He has also posted a photograph of Barbara Jordan , a Texas congresswoman and civil rights leader who was the chairwoman of an immigration commission he advised in 1996 , doing so in part , Mr. Beck said , to ward off racist members .
“If you’re a white supremacy group , that ’s sort of a signal to you that , ‘This is not our group , ’ ” Mr. Beck said .
Tax disclosures filed in 2013 show that NumbersUSA received about $ 4.5 million from the Colcom Foundation , a Pittsburgh-based organization founded by Cordelia Scaife May , the Mellon banking heiress .
The foundation says it works to combat overpopulation ; the Southern Poverty Law Center says the foundation funds hate groups with “nativist ” missions .
The foundation’s vice president of philanthropy is John F. Rohe , a Tanton loyalist and biographer .
Numbers USA , Mr. Beck said , has “always stayed away from cultural issues . ”
From his earliest days , Mr. Beck focused on numbers .
Now the father of two adult sons , he was raised in Marshfield , a town of 2,500 in Missouri’s Ozarks , where he delivered milk and collected cans to make pocket money .
After journalism school at the University of Missouri , Mr. Beck became interested in immigration while covering the birth of the environmental movement in the late 1960s , as concern grew about the consequences of population growth on natural resources .
Disillusioned when he thought immigration was not receiving sufficient attention , he left journalism in the 1990s to write books , and later decided to start Numbers USA .
He began with a video , recorded on VHS tape in 1996 , in which he used a huge container of colored gumballs to illustrate the billions of people living in third world countries , and a small glass snifter to portray the United States , taking in millions more immigrants , one gumball at a time .
The gumballs are still in his office , but on a recent afternoon , he left them behind and instead took PowerPoint slides to make his arguments to a group of students from Grinnell College in Iowa who are spending a semester in Washington .
“At the end , unless somebody’s watching the numbers , you end up with a problem , ” Mr. Beck told the group .
“It sounds horrible , does n’t it ? ”
Mr. Beck conceded of his group ’s position that immigration should be sharply curtailed and strict new workplace screenings instituted , so any undocumented worker is immediately laid off .
“People say , ‘Boy that ’s really mean — it ’s so mean — because you’re making that person who has a job lose a job , ’ ” Mr. Beck told his young audience .
“And yet , as long as they’re in that job , what’s the meanest thing of all ?
The Americans that don’t have that job . ”
