In a twist on how Silicon Valley companies are financed , several technology luminaries have banded together to effectively do the work of a traditional venture capital firm .
The Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates , Yahoo co-founder Jerry Yang , Twitter co-founder Evan Williams and others have invested $ 25 million in Change .org , the petitions website , to help it expand .
Others in the group include prominent business leaders like the billionaire Richard Branson , eBay founder Pierre M. Omidyar and LinkedIn co-founder Reid Hoffman .
In all , two dozen investors are contributing $ 250,000 to a few million dollars each .
“It would have been a lot more straightforward to raise money from a single institution , ” said Ben Rattray , Change .org’s
chief executive .
“ But we had a group of people who are passionate about our mission and who had experience building global enterprises , who we can turn to for advice . ”
Change .org lets users create online petitions that call on governments and companies to act on specific issues .
One recent campaign , begun after Michael Brown ’s death , calls for police in St . Louis County , the city of St . Louis and Ferguson , Mo. , where Mr. Brown was killed , to wear body cameras .
It quickly received more than 130,000 signatures .
Another campaign , started after Unilever sued a start-up food company that makes a mayonnaise alternative , called for big companies to “stop bullying sustainable food companies . ”
It garnered more than 100,000 supporters in less than a month .
Change .org had already raised nearly $ 20 million , most of it in a $ 15 million fund-raising round last year .
The new infusion of $ 25 million will be used to expand the company ’s engineering team , invest in mobile development and expand a tool that allows the businesses and politicians who are the targets of petitions to engage with users .
“We want a world where elected representatives can openly and authentically connect with their constituents at scale , ” Mr. Rattray said .
Among Silicon Valley start-ups , Change .org
has a reputation for being a progressive , mission-driven company .
Despite having a dot-org web suffix , it is a for-profit company .
But it is a benefit , or B , corporation , a distinction that allows it to make decisions based on what is good for society , not just what is good for its shareholders .
This year , for example , Change .org announced a generous new parental leave policy for its employees .
“B corps are different than traditional corporations in that they have higher standards of social and environmental performance , accountability and transparency , ” said Andrew Kassoy , a co-founder of B Lab , which certifies such companies .
Other start-ups including Etsy and Kickstarter are B corporations .
And divisions of some big public companies , like Ben & Jerry’s , which is owned by Unilever , have received the certification .
Change .org did not say how much investors estimated the company was worth with this latest round of financing .
Though many prominent start-ups have been pegged as being worth tens of billions of dollars , Mr. Rattray played down the importance of Silicon Valley companies chasing higher valuations .
“Some C.E.O.s become overly focused on building the valuation , instead of building the company , ” he said .
“We want the proxy for our success to be the victories of our campaigns . ”
More than 80 million people worldwide are using the site .
A majority of new users are from abroad .
This year , a petition to spare a Christian Sudanese woman from being executed attracted more than a million supporters .
The woman , Meriam Yehya Ibrahim , was freed this summer with help from the Italian and American governments .
The pooling of so many investors in Change .org’s
latest round recalls the angel investing model , in which investors typically put in much smaller amounts to finance fledgling companies , at a much large scale .
But it is unusual for a group of investors to commit so much money that funds from a traditional venture capital firm are unnecessary .
Last month , ZenPayroll , a San Francisco start-up , was among the few companies to do something similar , with more than 50 individual investors participating in its latest $ 20 million fund-raising round .
Mr. Rattray said having this prominent group of investors support Change .org would give him access to a network of advisers who could help guide the company as it continues to grow .
“These are people who recognize the power of the Internet , ” he said .
Others in the group include Sam Altman , the president of Y Combinator , the tech incubator company , and Michael Birch , co-founder of Bebo , a former social media site .
Because the money comes from individuals , not a venture capital firm with a specific time frame for getting a return on its investment , Change .org
will not be under pressure to go public or sell quickly , Mr. Rattray said .
“The reason we want mission aligned investors with long-term horizons is so we can focus on the product , ” he said .
Mr. Yang , the Yahoo co-founder , said he was not looking for a quick flip .
“Investing as an individual allows for a different time frame for an investment to mature , ” he wrote by email .
“For me , Change .org is a long-term investment that is aligned with the company ’s mission and its vision for continued growth as an independent business . ”
One repeat investor in the round is Omidyar Network , which represents Mr. Omidyar .
It had invested in Change .org ,
and supported the unique fund-raising approach .
“We wanted to see the organization broaden out its sponsorship and sources of capital ” with “individuals who look like institutions and can write meaningful checks , ” said Chris Bishko , an investment partner at Omidyar Network .
Mr. Bishko called Change .org “a global platform that is giving ordinary people a stronger voice on how things operate . ”
“This is an incredible innovation , and we’re just at the tip of the iceberg , ” he said .
But petitions are not all that Change .org
aspires to organize .
Mr. Rattray said he hoped it would also become a platform for organizing voting , fund-raising and more .
“Petitions are to Change .org as books were to Amazon , ” he said .
