Rules , schmules .
As many people in Portland , Ore. , left work to return home on Friday evening , Uber , the ride-hailing start-up , began offering rides in that city for the first time , despite loud protests from local officials who have deemed the service illegal .
That devil-may-care approach to dealing with city officials — entering a city without permission and dealing with regulatory issues after its services are well established and locals are already hooked — has become a hallmark of Uber’s strategy .
In October , Uber began its service in Las Vegas , where it was deemed illegal ; multiple drivers were cited within hours of the company ’s debut there .
Similar scenarios played out in Austin , Tex . , Philadelphia and other cities around the country .
But Uber’s move in Portland comes just days after it vowed in a blog post to become a “ smarter and more humble company . ”
Uber , which is now valued at more than $ 40 billion , is reeling from a string of recent embarrassments that have critics questioning its ethics .
The company ’s executives have been accused of taking a lax approach to customer privacy , among other criticisms .
In Portland , the commissioner in charge of the city ’s Bureau of Transportation was furious enough at Uber that he suggested Portland should amend its regulations to allow Lyft — one of Uber’s biggest competitors — instead of Uber , to operate in the city .
On his Facebook page , the mayor threatened fines for the company and its drivers .
“People should know that Uber’s action is illegal , ” Mayor Charlie Hales said in the post .
“The city will enforce existing regulations .
That could include fines for the company , as well as fines for drivers . ”
Uber’s service , which allows users to summon a private car with a smartphone app , has become hugely popular in the five years since it was started .
The service has ballooned and now operates in more than 250 cities in 50 countries .
Uber’s arrival in Portland has been something of an inevitability .
The service has been available in more than a dozen cities surrounding the greater Portland area for months , and the company has been in talks with Portland .
“We’ve been talking to them for over a year , and we will continue to talk with them , ” said Eva Behrend , an Uber spokeswoman .
But Portland transportation officials have fought to examine current regulatory statutes before allowing the service to operate in the city .
Steve Novick , the commissioner of the Bureau of Transportation , said he learned of Uber’s intentions to set up shop earlier today when he received a text message from a reporter that said , “Uber tells me they’re launching at 5 , do you have anything to say ? ”
Not long after , Mr. Novick and Mr. Hales were on a conference call with Uber’s senior vice president for policy and strategy , David Plouffe , the former political strategist who ran President Obama’s 2008 campaign .
“Plouffe said , ‘ Well , you know we’re active in these markets and we’re providing a service and there is great demand in Oregon and blah blah blah , ’ ” Mr. Novick said .
“ I said , ‘Mr.
Plouffe , announcing that you’re going to break the law is not civil . ’
”
Mr. Novick added : “This is not about whether we should have a thoughtful conversation about changing taxi regulations — we’re up for that .
This is about one company thinking it is above the law . ”
If and when Portland amends its regulations to allow ride-sharing services like Uber , Mr. Novick said he wished there were some way for him to still prohibit Uber from coming to Portland .
“ I don’t know if this is legally feasible , but my inclination would be to allow Lyft here a long time before Uber , ” he said .
“Lyft seems like a respectable company , and Uber seems like a bunch of thugs . ”
But Uber does not show signs of slowing down .
“The statement by Commissioner Novick shows a real disregard for consumer demand , choice and what the people of Portland want , ” Ms. Behrend , the Uber spokeswoman , said .
