http://www.cbsnews.com/news/self-described-wall-street-whiz-kid-says-he-made-up-72-million-fortune/
There 's an update to a story reported Monday about a self-described Wall Street whiz kid .
Mohammed Islam said he made $ 72 million investing on the stock market in a New York Magazine interview published this week .
However , after a flurry of attention Monday , the teen said he made it all up , reports CBS News correspondent Michelle Miller
The rumors of Mohammed 's self-made million dollar fortune reportedly began at his high school late last year .
That 's when the 17-year-old from Queens realized he would turn those rumors into an elaborate , exaggerated lie .
In an online video for the Leaders Investment Club , Mohammed Islam appeared to be a young professional with a knack for picking stocks .
" From an early age , I 've always had an interest in finance and entrepreneurship , " he said in the video .
" Having earned reputable returns over the past years , I 'm glad to say that trading is a passion . "
Instagram photos show the 17-year-old easily making friends .
As the investment club president at the prestigious Stuyvesant High School , he even presented a lecture about his supposed financial prowess .
But in an interview with the New York Observer , the self-described teen tycoon admitted it 's all a sham :
" You seem to be quoted saying 'eight figures . '
That 's not true , is it ? "
" No . "
" Is there any figure ?
Have you invested and made returns at all ? "
" No . "
" So it 's total fiction ? "
" Yes . "
New York Observer editor Ken Kurson interviewed Mohammed and his friend , Damir Tulemaganbetov , who also took part in the hoax .
" I think that he wanted to impress people and he told a few fibs and got this reputation as this master investor and once that reputation is rolling how do you unwind it ? "
Kurson said .
In this week 's issue of New York Magazine , Mohammed is ranked "number 12 " of "reasons to love New York " because he "made $ 72 million trading stocks on his lunch break . "
" We want to create a brotherhood , " Mohammed told the New York Magazine reporter over a round of "freshly squeezed apple juice . "
" Like the Koch brothers , " he said .
" Like in ' Wolf of Wall Street . "
Damir added .
New York Magazine has since retracted the story 's title and the online article contains an editor 's note which states , " Our story portrays the $ 72 million figure as a rumor .
Mohammed provided bank statements that showed he is worth eight figures , and he confirmed on the record that he 's worth eight figures . "
" People want stories , they want them fast , but they also want them right and there is tension between getting them up there quickly and getting them up there correctly , " Kurson said .
In a statement to "CBS This Morning , " representatives for Mohammed said his millions are about as real as " Monopoly money . "
CBS News reached out to New York Magazine for a statement and have not received a response .
Mohammed said he 's especially sorry for embarrassing his family .
