http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/07/jobs/how-ibm-brings-ideas-forward-from-its-teams.html
When you walk into a meeting , there’s always someone who thinks he or she is the smartest person in the room .
A meeting room is often the “Breakfast Club ” of the working world .
You’ve got the extrovert , the introvert , the know-it-all and the ambitious steamroller .
No matter what the mix , there’s always someone who dominates the discussion , and others who defer to that person out of frustration — or worse , complacency .
But getting the best work out of a team is n’t about silencing the loudest person .
It’s about getting everyone involved to explore every angle , bring all ideas to the surface and collaborate on a path forward .
Two years ago , I was asked to lead the transformation of product design at <START:organization> IBM <END> .
My challenge is n’t simply to add designers .
It’s to create agile , multidisciplinary teams that include designers , developers and product managers .
Designing around the user experience , part of what’s known as “design thinking , ” has become crucial to the success of business software .
It’s not simply because people expect consumer-type experiences at work , but also because the information we receive and the speed with which we’re expected to deal with it have exploded in just a few years .
Work tools must be redesigned for this new complexity .
I’ve seen that team members are pretty good at organizing themselves when they have established relationships .
When people know one another and have developed empathy and trust , the issue of getting everyone’s ideas on the table does n’t come up much .
Over time you learn about each other , come to respect those who can contribute and just figure out how to work together .
I’ve seen this happen more often than not .
But when your organization is in the midst of transformation — whether it is a three-person start-up hiring a fourth employee or a big global company leading major shifts in technology — you are faced with teams of people who don’t necessarily have the shared experiences that enable them to behave well together .
Team dynamics can easily get in the way of good ideas , and the loudest voice often wins .
I used to lead start-ups and have found that the same basic meeting practices can be used no matter what the size of a company .
These strategies are effective with design thinking because they not only unleash everyone’s creativity but also give voice to every idea .
It has been my experience that the biggest impediment to getting people to think about what’s possible — instead of what’s not possible — is the difficulty in exposing everyone’s ideas to the broader team .
So we focus on two things : getting everyone to contribute and letting everyone’s contribution be heard .
That does n’t come naturally .
Sometimes organizational hierarchy might prevent a good idea from being considered because it was n’t shared .
So at IBM , we intentionally assemble teams that span skills , levels of experience and points of view .
And then ?
It starts with a sticky note and a pen .
We did this for our new business email tool , <START:organization> IBM Verse <END> , which helps workers prioritize tasks and find the right people and information quickly .
We began not by declaring that we wanted to transform enterprise email , but by asking the team to think about what people dislike about email .
In cases like this , we begin by holding workshops where teams are given minimal instructions , and pen and paper .
After the team leader presents a challenge , the room goes silent .
Everyone spends 10 minutes writing their thoughts on sticky notes .
One idea per note .
No talking allowed .
Then , idea by idea , people post their sticky notes on a big whiteboard .
There’s still no talking , no judging yourself or others .
It’s total mindfulness about the user’s experience .
There’s no battling over the best ideas or who owns what .
Just get your thoughts out of your brain and on the wall .
The group keeps posting sticky notes until they slow to a dribble .
When the members are done , everyone steps back .
We call this popcorning .
You don’t want to give people too much time .
The point is to get everyone involved quickly .
Then , the team leader groups the sticky notes into overlapping and logical areas .
People take it all in , reflect , and then they disappear .
They are free to leave the room — or the building — to brainstorm with colleagues face to face , on the phone or via a group texting tool .
This opens up the playing field to less-vocal members of the team who are more apt to speak up online .
After this freestyle brainstorming , the group returns to the room , sometimes after minutes but it could be hours or even days .
Invariably they bring at least a couple dozen new ideas .
Those go up on the board .
Getting every idea in front of the team is important because it ’s very difficult to quash a good idea if it ’s shared .
Once you know something , you can’t unknow it — you have to act .
None of this is rocket science , but it ’s powerful if applied consistently .
It makes for better teams and it leads to better outcomes .
When you give voice to more people , the best ideas win , not the loudest ones .
